---
layout: post
title: "Types"
date: "2015-11-21 12:17"
---

Python has a set of basic types that most larger programs are built from. If you ever browse through any library or program someone has built, you'll most likely see one of these types used.

Boolean
=======

```python
# Type
bool

# Values
True
False
```

Booleans are simply whether a value is true or not. They're as simple as they get. Also, before I get too far ahead of myself, I used a special Python syntax for my comments. the `# Type` and `# Values` are what's known as comments. They signify that everything after the `#` is a comment from the programmer to other programmers, and that it should be ignored. I'll go over this more later.

Numbers
=======
Integer
-------

```python
# Type
int

# Values
-100
-3
0
1
9999
```

Integers are positive or negative whole numbers (not decimals. We will get to them shortly). Like any numbers, we can do math with them. Python has a set of basic arithmetic that we can use for any number type.

```python
# Addition
1 + 2
# Returns 3

# Subtraction
4 - 2
# Returns 2

# Multiplication
3 * 10
# Returns 30

# Division
1 / 2
# Returns 0

# Modulus (Remainder)
3 % 4
# Returns 3

# Exponents
10**3
# Returns 1000

# Brackets also work too!
(1 + 2) * 3
# Returns 9

# And what happens when we divide by zero?
1 / 0
# Raises ZeroDivisionError
```

Let's break this down a bit. The addition, subtraction, multiplication, modulus, exponents, and brackets are very self explanatory, but what's happening with the division? Integers are only whole numbers, so it will always round down when a decimal number will be produced. There are a couple of ways around this that I will introduce later on. Also, the ZeroDivisionError is something special that will be handled in the [Exceptions]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url /python/2015-11-21-exceptions %}) chapter.

Python also supports testing if integers are greater than, less than, equal to, or not equal to another number.

```python
# Greater than
1 > 2
# Returns False

# Less than
3 < 10
# Returns True

# Greater than or equal to
3 >= 10
# Returns False

# Less than or equal to
10 <= 10
# Returns True

# Not equal to
10 != 10
# Returns False

# Equal to
3 == 3
# Returns True
```

Long Integers
-------------

```python
# Type
long

# Values
3L
100000000000L
```

Longs are very special integers. In Python 2, there's a maximum value for Integers. On my system, it is `9223372036854775807`. Once I go over this value, Python will automatically switch to using longs instead. Long values theoretically do not have a maximum value, but practically it is whatever the computer can store in memory.

Floats (Decimals)
-----------------

```python
# Type
float

# Values
1.0
0.0
-1.0
1.23456789

1e10
1e-10

inf
nan
```

Floats are approximations of decimal numbers. This means that there are certain values that floats do not support. Unless you are working with financial data, this will probably never be an issue. However, one thing to note is that the further the value is away from `0.0`, the less accurate the number will be. This problem can be seen in Maya when an object is over a million units away from the origin, and then animated. The animation will likely be choppy when the object is moved because there is not enough resolution at that distance.

Also, floats support two special values. `inf` is infinite, and `nan` is not a number. It is most likely that you will not see these values while programming, but knowing about them is always useful. One thing to note is that you cannot directly type in these values in Python. There is a way to get the values, but I will go over that shortly.

Mix and Match
-------------

```python
1.0 + 2
# Returns 3.0

1L + 2
# Returns 3L

1.0 / 2
# Returns 0.5

3 / 4.0
# Returns 0.75

1.0 == 1
# Returns True

3 < 0.123
# Returns False

1L != 1.0
# Returns False
```

All numbers support math operations and value testing using any other number, regardless of type. One thing to note, is the type of the number can change depending on the types that are used. For example, doing an operation with an `int` and a `long` will return a `long`, while doing an operation with an `int` or `long` with a `float` will return a `float`.

None
----

```python
# Type
NoneType

# Value
None
```

`None` is a very special type. It represents nothing. While 0 can represent nothing, 0 is not nothing, since it has a type (`int`). Also, unlike other types, you cannot cast something to `None` (will explain casting later). Also, Python does not expose `NoneType` by default. This is very useful for specifying default arguments in [functions]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url /python/2015-11-21-functions %}), or as a value to initialize a [variable]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url /python/2015-11-21-variables %}) to when searching for specific objects.

Casting
-------

```python
int(1.0)
# Returns 1

float(123)
# Returns 123.0

long(1.23456)
# Returns 1L

# What happens if we use a float that would usually be rounded up?
int(1.5)
# Returns 1

# What happens if we don't add a value?
float()
# Returns 0.0
```

Python lets you convert from one type to another by using the syntax \<type\>(\<value\>). Also, you can get the default value of the type by leaving out the value when "calling" the type.

Mutable vs Immutable
--------------------

Before we move onto the other basic types, I should mention the concept of mutable vs immutable objects. Mutable means that the value can be changed, while immutable means that the value cannot be changed unless the value is completely reassigned. I will go into more examples with the next types. All of the shown types are immutable. This will mean more when we go further in the tutorial.


String
------

```python
# Type
str
unicode

# Values
# Single line strings
"Hi! My name is Scott!"
"Isn't Python awesome?"
"a"
'Here is another string using different quotes.'
'These let me "mix and match".'
"I can also \"escape\" quotes using a backslash."
"12345"

# Multi-line strings
"""One line of test not enough?

Use 3 quotes!"""
'''Single quotes work just fine too.

Cool, eh?'''

u"We also support unicode characters"
```

Strings let you store text. They're immutable like the number types, but they are different for a few reasons. One of them is that strings are sequences of characters. For example, the string `"This is a string"` is represented in memory like `T` `h` `i` `s` ` ` `i` `s` ` ` `a` ` ` `s` `t` `r` `i` `n` `g`. Each character is given an index starting with 0. The reason why it starts with 0 is that it represents the offset from the start of the block of memory. So, 0 means that the character has no offset from the start, and 1 is 1 character away from the start of the memory block, and so on.

Another way to represent this idea is like this:

```
| T  | h  | i  | s  |    | i  | s  |    | a  |    | s  | t  | r  | i  | n  | g  |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| 0  | 1  | 2  | 3  | 4  | 5  | 6  | 7  | 8  | 9  | 10 | 11 | 12 | 13 | 14 | 15 |
```

Lists
-----

Tuples
------

Dictionaries
------------

Sets
----

Frozen Sets
-----------
